      21st March 2024
WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES MILL-WIDE                                        IN ORIENT PAPER MILLS -AMLAI 
1.0 INTRODUCTION- WATER  CONSERVATION
The 3 Rs  viz., Reduce, Recycle and Reuse- encompass Total Water management               [ Fig.1].
                                                                Fig.1. - 3 Rs of  Total Water Management
1.1. Combating Water Loss and Improving Water Management Infrastructure
One of the objectives of Water Conservation is to increase the effectiveness of water supply and storage systems and water treatment facilities to help reduce water loss caused by faulty infrastructure - in both existing and new facilities. Concrete structures, such as water storage  tanks, reservoirs, pumping stations, pipelines, canals, treatment tanks, drainage systems  and others are an integral part of modern water management and supply facilities. 
Water loss in concrete structures occurs as a result of cracks, pores and capillaries, which render concrete permeable. In addition, poor mixing, placement and/or workmanship (incl. too much or too little vibration and insufficient curing) can create segregation, honeycombs and other concrete faults that further increase concrete permeability. These areas pose as possible entryways for water into and out of the concrete structure. In addition, a variety of chemicals and corrosive agents enter concrete in an aqueous solution. These substances initiate deterioration processes in the concrete that lead to further cracking and degradation in concrete. This increases permeability, which in turn promotes even more water loss. 
STATION -1
                                                        PULP MILL STATION
1.0 LEAKAGES -IDENTIFIED 
1.1. Water Leakage  from  the Concrete basin
Water is leaking on a continued basis from the Concrete basin. Though the water loss through leakage is not high, yet the leakage over a period of time would weaken the basin & create problem in increased crack widening over continued period of operation with water being stored as such.

Fig.2.   Leaking Concrete Basin

Fig.3.     Concrete Pond
STATION -2
2.0 Paper Machine Station  -Stock  Preparation
In Paper Machine Station, Large Holding Tanks in Stock preparation are of concrete structure. PENETRON product shall be the right choice for strengthening of the  holding tanks as also ensure avoidance of any corrosion of  steel  connected with the containers.
There have been leakages identified in the unbleached silo, bleached silo, D1 tank, paper plant roof and in the pathway at the mezzanine level of the paper plant. The silos need to be attended by grouting with Cement slurry mixed with Penetron Admix which could then remain as a dynamic and dormant system to arrest potential leakages as and when they occur.
                                                                   STATION -3
 CHEMICAL RECOVERY COMPLEX
MEE Station                                                                                                                                  At various places in the Recovery Boiler complex , specifically in Evaporator area, pools of water are overflowing & getting drained -on a continuous basis. These water quantities can be captured and led to a storage  tank and preserved for reuse/recycle for further use in the mill.
Mill-wide Water wastage mitigation
On  the same pretext as stated in the earlier section, there are small water leakages, overflows , drains observed mill-wide in pockets. Though isolated, on similar lines as rain water harvesting, all  efforts should be made to arrest leakages -  minor & major- overflows, drains etc. and try to conserve collected water  in pockets [ storage/ holding basins] and then reuse in appropriate places/processes within plant premises
Evaporator Secondary Condensate
With the successful implementation of heat recovery from  hot secondary vapour condensate for DM water preheating in PHE, the next stage is one of reusing the cooled secondary condensate elsewhere in the mill after reprocessing to suit.
Cooling Tower integrated to MEE Condenser 
With the heat loading being partially reduced in the cooling tower, the water evaporated also goes down marginally resulting in lowered fresh make -up water addition. Plans are afoot for tapping huge amount of lukewarm water return from MEE condenser being diverted away from cooling tower [ relating to Pulping/Digester station for pulping & BHR], the thermal load to the cooling tower would be significantly reduced. This is expected to reduce fresh make-up water consumption on a continued basis.
                                                             STATION -4
                                                     4.0   BOILER COMPLEX
 4.1. Boiler Blow-down
With very high quality DM water [alongwith polished process & turbine return condensates] as HP Boiler feed water and with advanced polymer [ Eloguard reagent dosing], the boiler blow-down would  be lowered-thereby saving in high quality DM  water make-up as also the heat in otherwise discharged blow down water.
4.2. CPU
It is proposed toimplement soonest process condensate return polishing preceded by lowering of heat with WHR . High percentage return of indirect process return condensate would result inlowered DM water requirement as make-up. High quality water quantity would be saved on a continuous basis.
STATION -5                                                                                                                              5.0 STEAM TURBO-GENERATOR BATTERY
5.1 WATER CONSERVATION  -SPRAY POND WITH INTEGRATED WATER CANAL
5.1.1.Prelude                                                                                                                                                           There are 2 Main Steam turbo-generators in continuous operation generating Power as well as  Steam for Process & Utilities of the entire plant.  Both 30 MW ST & 25 MW ST Multi-extraction Condensing Steam turbines have Condenser water cooling from common source. Cooling water in closed cycle circulates through tubes of both the turbine condensers and extract heat in exhaust steam .Heat is rejected in the Spray pond and cooled water is recirculated back to  condenser and the cycle continues.

Fig.4.  The 2 Steam turbine Condensers with Spray Pond  Cooling water cycle 
5.2 Spray Pond -Water Conservation
Steam turbines are with condensers integrated at turbine exhaust. Cooling water used  for exhaust steam condensation   is in closed circulation connected to spray pond wherein the warm water return from  the condensers is cooled through fine spray mist cooling through  spray nozzles located in huge spray pond.
The spray pond is a vast concrete area with  dimensions of  90 metres long and 36 metres wide.  Sprayed cooled water is collected in the water concrete basin  below.  Since depth  of the pond is ~3 metres, hydrostatic head would be acting on the basin.
Fig.5. SPRAY POND with SPRAY NOZZLES -IN OPERATION



This has a potential of leaking into the sub-soil and thereby losing a considerable amount of water. Apart from  water losses through drift, adjacent areas splashing and through fine mist  evaporation,  it is strongly felt that there could be some water loss through seepage underneath  & sides of the concrete water holding spray pond on a continued basis. This apart over a period of time longevity & strength of the concrete basin especially the bottom side holding the water under hydrostatic pressure would be a matter of concern.
The above philosophy of water loss and weakening of holding canal -applies to the integrated canal to the spray pond- transferring the cooled water from the spray pond back to the condenser tubes of the 2 Steam Turbines.
6.0 PENETRON Solution
PENETRON product would be an ideal solution  ensuring longevity  of the basin as also more importantly conservation of water. Penetron application over the entire Spray Pond Concrete Basin and canal  and allother areas as stated elsewhere in this document relates to Water saving -connected to MoEF/CC Rules 2023- LiFE [ Carbon Credits]- Table -1 as under:
                                                                        MoEF & CC - LiFE
GREEN CREDITS PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION RULES 2023
ActivityRequirement1Tree PlantationActivities for Green Cover Increase2Water Water Conservation, harvesting ,conservation ,use & savings3Sustainable AgriculturePromote Natural  Agricultural Practices & Land Restoration4Waste ManagementImproved practices ( incl. Collection, segregation & treatment5Air Pollution ReductionMeasures for  Promotion for reducing Air pollutants & other Pollution Abatement activities6Mangrove Conservation & RestorationMeasures for Conservation & restoration7EcomarkEncourage manufacturers to obtain Ecomark label for goods and services8Sustainable Building & Infra-structureEncourage  construction of Buildings and other infrastructure using sustainable technologies and materials.
7.0. SUMMARY & RECOMMENDATORY SUGGESTIONS
As can be seen from the first hand overview analysis, there is considerable scope for reducing water consumption-drawl in-take on a sustained & continuous basis in Orient Paper  Mills plant complex. 
To make a decent & humble beginning , the schemes & areas identified in this report can be straightaway taken up  for implementation on top priority -so as to realize reasonable  water savings on a continued basis. Alongside, as the water savings entail Carbon credit under MoEF & CC LiFE green credits programme, certainly there should be impetus because of added carbon credit accrual in no small way.


									Dr Sundara Raman


























